# Ready Player One and a Dystopian View of Future Oil Prices

I read [Ready Player One][player] recently and I enjoyed it; it was a pretty
fast read and I finished it in a day. It presents a view of the future where
the possibilities allowed by a virtual reality world surpass those of the real
world, so most people spend as much time as possible connected to a system
called OASIS.

One part of the book's prediction of the future bothered me. The author
describes the price of oil skyrocketing, causing the decay of American roads,
and cities with cars stacked around their exteriors, as the unaffordable price
of oil made them too expensive to drive.

This bothered me and my economics degree. People *hugely* value the ability to
move around and travel for many reasons:

- For reasons we cannot yet explain in-classroom teaching produces better
results than online teaching, meaning the teacher and students need to travel
to the same place (There's a study showing this result but I don't know where
it is).

- People migrate for work, to bring their skills to an area of the world where
there's more demand for them, see for example the millions of Filipinos who work
overseas. People will still need food delivered and haircuts and their plumbing
fixed and their cars driven even if they spend twelve hours a day with
a headset strapped to their face.

- The same is mostly true of relationships and friendship bonding; the face to
face time is a costly signal that helps show the other person you care and are
committed to the relationship.

- People enjoy traveling for tourism, to see beaches, mountains, etc. Sure
virtual reality could put you on a beach and it might be "good enough" but a
device that can replicate the feeling of the sand beneath your toes is still a
ways away.

And many, many more; sure, virtual reality may chip away at the margins here
but there still will be a vast demand for people to fly around the planet.

The vast demand means that there's a *huge* incentive for folks to figure out
cost-effective ways to get around. If gas gets too expensive, we see people
figure out ways to create gas from other minerals, as the large expansion of
activity in North Dakota shows. Or there will be more of an incentive to figure
out how to store solar energy to use at night, or more of an incentive to use
electric power to get around, and we'd see more trains and less planes.

How can we turn this into a testable prediction? One obvious answer is to look
at the price of oil. The author writes that the price will be sky-high, causing
people to abandon their cars. Well another group of people bet on the price of
oil every day. I tend to trust them more, because if they are wrong, they will
lose tons of money.

Data from the CME Group indicates that [the best prediction for the price of
oil in December 2022 is $86.20][price], **lower than it is today.** Now, there
are some caveats that would affect this. There are reasons to believe the
futures price might be lower than the true price in 2026, because a buyer today
is assuming risk and the seller is shedding it. On the flip side at least one
source states that [oil futures with long maturities][oil] tend to be priced
higher than the actual price.

So that's the best prediction of the price of oil 8 years from now - about what
it is today, not drastically higher. **I would encourage anyone who thinks oil
will be very expensive (including the author) to bet on that outcome**, and
profit from all of the people who currently think it will be cheap.

In general we look to science fiction authors for a vision of what the future
will look like. In some places they may be better than average at predicting
what the future will look like. But clearly in others, they're not.

[price]: http://www.cmegroup.com/trading/energy/crude-oil/light-sweet-crude.html

[player]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B004J4WKUQ/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B004J4WKUQ&linkCode=as2&tag=kburkeorg-20&linkId=HE5QFHWRIUDSZ365

[oil]: http://www.investopedia.com/articles/07/contango_backwardation.asp
